---
layout: post
title: The Website Development Process
date: 2007-04-14 02:00
comments: true
categories:
- linux 
---
I liked this article so copying it from source site and pasting it onto my blog you can also <a href="http://www.pingmag.jp/2005/12/09/the-website-development-process/">visit source website</a>.<br /><br /><br /><p><img src="http://images.pingmag.jp/images/title/howtomakeawebsite.jpg" class="main" alt="The Website Development Process" /></p>
									<div class="picturecaptionlong">Our three characters: a programmer, a designer and a client.</div>

						<p>A while ago I put <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/yongfook/45748609/">this</a> photo on my flickr page and it was chosen to go on the <a href="http://blog.flickr.com/flickrblog/2005/09/index.html">official flickr blog</a> as the photo of that day (September 23rd).  To date it has been viewed over 2000 times.</p>

<p>The photo was actually one in a whole series of photos I shot for a
client presentation, detailing the website design / development process
in a manner that was easily understandable and also fun to look at.
This article takes you through that process, using the same photos. We
hope you enjoy the pictures and if it also helps you to manage your
workflow better if you are starting out as a web designer then that’s
cool too :)</p>

<p>However, as is the organic nature of these things, there are an
infinite amount of variables that can affect the project timeline. For
that reason, projects are never <em>ever</em> as clear-cut as in this
sequence of photos. Things may need to be done over and over, steps may
get jiggled around, you may need more time for CMS / back-end
development etc - so please think of this sequence as merely a <em>basic</em> example of the kind of process that I have grown comfortable with, speaking as a web designer/developer.</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite1.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 1:</strong> Discussion</div>

<p>Naturally you’re going to want to start your project with a client
chit-chat. At the first meeting you need to establish the basic scope
of the work - what needs to be done, roles and responsibilities, who is
your point of contact for materials (text content, images) etc.</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite2.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 2:</strong> Brainstorming</div>

<p>Think about how you are going to structure things. What is
important? What is not? What needs to be on every page? Depending on
the scale of the project you might want to create a visual sitemap for
your client. Preparing a sitemap is essential if you are reorganising
content in any way.</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite3.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 3:</strong> Wireframe</div>

<p>A wireframe is a skeleton website, indicating all the navigation,
function and content elements that will appear on the final website,
but with <em>no graphic design elements</em>. It is used to iron out
any problems or missing elements, and will act as the blueprint for the
content, design and construction work that comes later. </p>

<p>How you create the wireframe is up to you - for small sites it might
be fine to just line-draw it in Illustrator or Photoshop, but for
larger, more complex sites, it might be necessary to actually code the
wireframe into HTML so the client can click around to check everything
is in the right place.</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite4.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 4:</strong> Planning the Content</div>

<p>Working from the sitemap and wireframe, you and the client get
together to start planning the content - specifically the text. Content
planning and writing is probably the biggest workload the client will
have during the project - and it can <em>really</em> take some time.</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite5.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 5:</strong> Initial Design</div>

<p>Whilst all this is going on, the designer can be working on the base design - the homepage and main sub-level pages.</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite6.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 6:</strong> Client Feedback</div>

<p>When the base design is ready, the client needs to check that you
are heading in the right direction and suggest adjustments to the
design accordingly.</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite7.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 7:</strong> Design Rework</div>

<p>…which will probably involve going back and tweaking things…</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite8.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 8:</strong> Client Approval</div>

<p>…until everyone is happy. </p>

<p>This process of <strong>work-feedback-rework</strong> is repeated at
various stages in the project. Besides preparing the content, this
confirmation process is also one of the main responsibilities of the
client.</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite9.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 9:</strong> Additional Page Design</div>

<p>Once the base design is agreed on, you can start working on the layout and design of each of the individual pages of the site.</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite10.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 10:</strong> Confirmation</div>

<p>And once again they are checked, reworked and then finally confirmed.</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite11.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 11:</strong> Build the HTML…</div>

<p>You can then begin to build the actual HTML pages…</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite12.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 12:</strong> …and the CSS</div>

<p>…and the CSS (I guess I could have put that all in one step, but I really like the little robot guy).</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite13.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 13:</strong> Present to Client</div>

<p>Feedback again. You and the client work together - <strong>work-feedback-rework</strong> - to polish and tweak things until you have a completed site.</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite14.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 14:</strong> Test</div>

<p>The final stage of production is the debug. The site needs to be
tested across all platforms to iron out any technical problems, and
checked thoroughly for content errors. Naturally, throughout the HTML
&amp; CSS development stage you should be checking cross-browser
functionality anyway but you definitely need a <em>big</em> check at the end too - one that you actually set aside a decent amount of time for.</p>

<p><img src="http://www.pingmag.jp/images/article/howtomakeawebsite15.jpg" class="main" alt="big pretty pic" /></p>

<div class="picturecaptionlong"><strong>Step 15:</strong> Launch</div>

<p>The picture says “The End” - but of course you don’t just grab the
cheque and run for the door - you need to watch the site for at least
around 10 days or so after launch in case of problems, and if necessary
fix things.</p><br /><br /><br /><p class="poweredbyperformancing">Powered by <a href="http://scribefire.com/">ScribeFire</a>.</p>
